TaskLocal test trait (#3329)
apple/swift-evolution: proposals/testing/NNNN-task-local-test-trait.md

# Proposed solution

A `.taskLocal` trait will be defined in Testing that allows overriding a task local for a single
test or a whole suite:

```swift
@Suite(.taskLocal(FeatureFlags.$isEnabled, true))
struct MySuite {
  // ...
}
```

# Detailed design

A new type will be defined to conform to `TestScoping`, as well as a static function for ease of
constructing the trait:

```swift
extension Trait {
  /// Constructs a trait that binds a task local value for the duration of a test
  /// or suite.
  ///
  /// - Parameters:
  ///   - taskLocal: The task local to bind the value to.
  ///   - value: The value to set.
  ///
  /// ```swift
  /// @Suite(.taskLocal($myValue, 42))
  /// struct MyTests {
  ///   // ...
  /// }
  /// ```
  ///
  /// - Note: You must define the task local outside the test target where the trait is used.
  public static func taskLocal<Value: Sendable>(
    _ taskLocal: TaskLocal<Value>,
    _ value: @autoclosure @escaping @Sendable () throws -> Value
  ) -> Self
  where Self == TaskLocalTrait<Value>
}

/// A type that binds a task local value for the scope of a test.
///
/// To add this trait to a test, use ``Trait/taskLocal(_:_:)``.

> public struct TaskLocalTrait<Value: Sendable>: SuiteTrait, TestTrait, TestScoping {

Reviewer: I mentioned this offline too, but I think it would be helpful for the trait instance to publicly expose its `taskLocal` as a property, and also expose a way to obtain the value to-be-bound. Since the value is captured as an `@autoclosure`, that could be done as an instance method such as
```swift
public func evaluate() async throws -> Value
```
akin to [`ConditionTrait.evaluate()`](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/testing/conditiontrait/evaluate()). And it could be proactively declared `async` to allow for future support for an `async` closure.

  public func provideScope(
    for test: Test,
    testCase: Test.Case?,
    performing function: @concurrent () async throws -> Void
  ) async throws
}
```

An important caveat to note (and is detailed in the documentation) is that the task local being
bound _must_ be defined outside the test target. One cannot bind a task local value like so:

```swift
@TaskLocal var isEnabled = false

@Test(.taskLocal($isEnabled, true))  // 🛑 Cannot find '$isEnabled' in scope
func test() {
 // ...
}
```

This is because currently the `@Test` macro cannot see the `$isEnabled` symbol created by the 
`@TaskLocal` macro. There are use cases for defining task locals in the test target along side tests
that want to override them, but it's not common, and you always have the option to move the task

> local to a separate target.

Reviewer: Consider linking to your Forum topic about this: https://forums.swift.org/t/macro-symbol-visibility-to-other-macros/87629

# TaskLocal test trait

* Proposal: [ST-NNNN](NNNN-task-local-test-trait.md)
* Authors: [Brandon Williams](https://github.com/mbrandonw), [Stephen Celis](https://github.com/stephencelis)
* Review Manager: TBD
* Status: **Awaiting review**

> * Implementation: [swiftlang/swift-testing#NNNNN](https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-testing/compare/main...pointfreeco:swift-testing:task-local-test-trait)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Implementation: [swiftlang/swift-testing#1764](https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-testing/pull/1764)
```

* Review: ([pitch](https://forums.swift.org/...))

# Introduction

A `.taskLocal` test trait is added to Testing that allows overriding a task local for a suite
or test.

# Motivation

In [ST-0007], test scoping traits were introduced to allow wrapping the execution
of tests so that code could be run before and after each test. The main

> motivation for this feature is overriding `[TaskLocal]`s for tests, and the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
motivation for this feature is overriding [`TaskLocal`s][SE-0311: TaskLocal] for tests, and the
```

to make the the link change below work

> motivation for this feature is overriding [`TaskLocal`s][SE-0311: TaskLocal] for tests, and the

Reviewer: Hmm, this still isn't showing the link in the [rendered version](https://github.com/pointfreeco/swift-evolution/blob/task-local-test-trait/proposals/testing/NNNN-task-local-test-trait.md) of the document. Might be a markdown syntax quirk

Reviewer 3: This might work better as a standard markdown link instead of the brackets link.

proposal mentions a [future direction][task-local-future-direction] to add a 
convenience trait specifically for overriding task locals. This proposal adds that
convenience.

> [TaskLocals]: https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/0311-task-locals.md

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[SE-0331: TaskLocal]: https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/0311-task-locals.md
```

For consistency

[ST-0007]: https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/testing/0007-test-scoping-traits.md
[task-local-future-direction]: https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/testing/0007-test-scoping-traits.md#convenience-trait-for-setting-task-locals

There are two primary motivations for adding this convenience:

> * Task locals are by far the [most common] reason to define custom `TestScoping` 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Task locals are by far the most common reason to define custom `TestScoping` 
```

not sure why the `[]`, just "the most common ..."

Reviewer 4: The brackets link just below to some context: https://github.com/search?q=testscoping+language%3ASwift+&type=code

We just found that a lot of the public `TestScoping` conformances are related to task locals.

        try await function()
      }
    }
  }
  extension Trait where Self == IsEnabledTrait {
    static func isEnabled(_ isEnabled: Bool) -> Self {
      Self(isEnabled: isEnabled)
    }
  }
  ```

  Ideally, we can drastically streamline overriding task locals in test with a dedicated convenience
  trait.

* When a task local is defined in a reusable library, the library maintainer cannot easily define a
  test trait for overriding the task local. Non-test targets cannot access Testing symbols, and so
  such a helper needs to be defined in a dedicated "test support" library. This introduces more
  inconvenience when shipping task locals in libraries. A dedicated `.taskLocal` trait allows one
  to override task locals in tests without creating a dedicated test support library.

# Proposed solution

A `.taskLocal` trait will be defined in Testing that allows overriding a task local for a single
test or a whole suite:

```swift
@Suite(.taskLocal(FeatureFlags.$isEnabled, true))
struct MySuite {
  // ...
}
```

# Detailed design

A new type will be defined to conform to `TestScoping`, as well as a static function for ease of
constructing the trait:

```swift
extension Trait {

>   /// Constructs a trait that overrides a task local value for the duration of a test

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  /// Constructs a trait that binds a task local value for the duration of a test
```

  /// or suite.
  ///
  /// - Parameters:

>   ///   - taskLocal: The task local to override.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  ///   - taskLocal: The task local to bind the value to.
```

For consistency, let's avoid the word "override" with task locals, we've always talked about them in terms of "binding" and "shadowing a binding" etc.

  ///   - value: The value to set.
  ///
  /// ```swift
  /// @Suite(.taskLocal($myValue, 42))
  /// struct MyTests {
  ///   // ...
  /// }
  /// ```
  ///
  /// - Note: The task local must be defined outside the test target where the trait is used.

>   public static func taskLocal<Value>(

Reviewer 2: Do you want to be explicit about the Value: Sendable maybe, so the API signature is a bit more self-documenting?

```suggestion
  public static func taskLocal<Value: Sendable>(
```

>   /// - Note: The task local must be defined outside the test target where the trait is used.

Reviewer: I'd tweak this slightly: this trait won't _strictly_ only be usable from test targets, although that will be the most common usage scenario. It could be used from a "test helper" or "testing support" module too for example, just as long as the TaskLocal being passed in is declared in some other module. Maybe this would be more precise?
```suggestion
  /// - Note: The task local must be declared in a separate module than the module where the trait is used.
```

    _ taskLocal: TaskLocal<Value>,
    _ value: Value
  ) -> Self
  where Self == TaskLocalTrait<Value> {
    TaskLocalTrait(taskLocal: taskLocal, value: value)

>   }

Reviewer: Similar to [this comment](https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-evolution/pull/3329/changes#r3442679697), in a proposal you can omit function bodies/implementation code
```suggestion
  where Self == TaskLocalTrait<Value>
```

}

> /// A type that binds a task local value for the scope of a test.

Reviewer: Suggest noting that the trait is recursive in this documentation, similar to what we did in [IssueHandlingTrait](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/testing/issuehandlingtrait):

```suggestion
/// A type that binds a task local value for the scope of a test.
///
/// When an instance of this trait is applied to a suite, it is recursively
/// inherited by all child suites and tests.
```

///
/// To add this trait to a test, use ``Trait/taskLocal(_:_:)``.

> public struct TaskLocalTrait<Value: Sendable>: SuiteTrait, TestScoping, TestTrait {

Reviewer: Minor stylistic thing, but I'd list `TestTrait` before `TestScoping`—it's a _trait_ type first and foremost

  public var isRecursive: Bool { true }

  fileprivate let taskLocal: TaskLocal<Value>

>   fileprivate let value: Value

Reviewer: In a proposal you don't need to include the non-public members, like these `fileprivate` properties
```suggestion
```

  public func provideScope(
    for test: Test,
    testCase: Test.Case?,
    performing function: @concurrent () async throws -> Void
  ) async throws {
    try await taskLocal.withValue(value, operation: function)

>   }

Reviewer: Similar to [this comment](https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-evolution/pull/3329/changes#r3442679697), in a proposal you can omit function bodies/implementation code
```suggestion
  ) async throws
```

}
```

An important caveat to note (and is detailed in the documentation) is that the task local being

> overridden _must_ be defined outside the test target. One cannot override a task local like so:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
bound _must_ be defined outside the test target. One cannot override a task local like so:
```

```swift
@TaskLocal var isEnabled = false

@Test(.taskLocal($isEnabled, true))  // 🛑 Cannot find '$isEnabled' in scope
func test() {
 // ...
}
```

This is because currently the `@Test` macro cannot see the `$isEnabled` symbol created by the 
`@TaskLocal` macro. There are use cases for defining task locals in the test target along side tests
that want to override them, but it's not common, and you always have the option to move the task
local to a separate target.

## Source compatibility

The proposed APIs are purely additive.

## Alternatives considered

A few other spellings have been proposed:

* `.set($isEnabled, true)`
* `.withValue(true, for: $isEnabled)`
* `.binding($isEnabled, to: true)`

We could also decide to not add the trait since technically it is possible to implement its 
functionality manually for each task local.

## Future directions

If Swift macros gain the ability to see symbols defined by other macros, we will be able to drop

> the restriction that task locals be defined outside the test target.

Reviewer: I understand where this comes from, but the phrasing of "…we will be able to drop the restriction…" could be a little confusing: the API itself isn't imposing any such restriction, it's a consequence of current language restrictions outside the scope of this proposal.

I'd suggest tweaking this by saying something like: if this macro limitation were resolved, then this proposed API would become usable in more contexts/situations. The thing I'm looking to clarify is that no further action or change to the API would be required; it would _"only"_ require a change to the language or macro system.

of tests so that code could be run before and after each test. The main
motivation for this feature is overriding `[TaskLocal]`s for tests, and the
proposal mentions a [future direction][task-local-future-direction] to add a 
convenience trait specifically for overriding task locals. This proposal adds that
convenience.

[TaskLocals]: https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/0311-task-locals.md
[ST-0007]: https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/testing/0007-test-scoping-traits.md
[task-local-future-direction]: https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/testing/0007-test-scoping-traits.md#convenience-trait-for-setting-task-locals

There are two primary motivations for adding this convenience:

* Task locals are by far the [most common] reason to define custom `TestScoping` 
  conformances. However, it takes quite a bit of repetitive work to define such
  conformances. For example, a trait to override a boolean task local looks like this:

  [most common]: https://github.com/search?q=testscoping+language%3ASwift+&type=code

  ```swift

>   struct _IsEnabledTrait: SuiteTrait, TestScoping, TestTrait {

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  struct IsEnabledTrait: SuiteTrait, TestScoping, TestTrait {
```

    let isEnabled: Bool
    let isRecursive = true
    func provideScope(
      for test: Test,
      testCase: Test.Case?,
      performing function: () async throws -> Void
    ) async throws {
      try await FeatureFlags.$isEnabled.withValue(isEnabled) {
        try await function()
      }
    }
  }

>   extension Trait where Self == _IsEnabledTrait {

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  extension Trait where Self == IsEnabledTrait {
```

public struct TaskLocalTrait<Value: Sendable>: SuiteTrait, TestScoping, TestTrait {
  public var isRecursive: Bool { true }

  fileprivate let taskLocal: TaskLocal<Value>
  fileprivate let value: Value

  public func provideScope(
    for test: Test,
    testCase: Test.Case?,
    performing function: @concurrent () async throws -> Void
  ) async throws {
    try await taskLocal.withValue(value, operation: function)
  }
}
```

An important caveat to note (and is detailed in the documentation) is that the task local being
overridden _must_ be defined outside the test target. One cannot override a task local like so:

```swift
@TaskLocal var isEnabled = false

@Test(.taskLocal($isEnabled, true))  // 🛑 Cannot find '$isEnabled' in scope
func test() {
 // ...
}
```

This is because currently the `@Test` macro cannot see the `$isEnabled` symbol created by the 
`@TaskLocal` macro. There are use cases for defining task locals in the test target along side tests
that want to override them, but it's not common, and you always have the option to move the task
local to a separate target.

## Source compatibility

The proposed APIs are purely additive.

## Alternatives considered

> A more general name for this API could be used instead of `.taskLocal`:

Reviewer 5: I think the workgroup discussed a couple of other possible names for this trait; please include any you remember here. (I specifically mentioned `withValue<T>(_: T, for taskLocal: TaskLocal<T>)`, and I think somebody else had at least one other suggestion but I don't recall offhand what it was.)

Reviewer: My suggestion was `.binding(T, to: V)`. The verb "bind" has some precedence in the TaskLocal documentation.

///
/// To add this trait to a test, use ``Trait/taskLocal(_:_:)``.
public struct TaskLocalTrait<Value: Sendable>: SuiteTrait, TestTrait, TestScoping {
  /// This trait's task local.
  public var taskLocal: TaskLocal<Value> { get set }
  
  /// Evaluate this trait's bound value.

>   public func evaluate() async throws -> Value

Reviewer: Oh, hmm: contradicting what I just [suggested](https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-evolution/pull/3329/changes/495ff335a4918095f0574e14ee57f018b753e7d1#r3606065272) above, maybe it would be even better as a computed property, still `async throws`, i.e.:

```swift
/// The value to bind to ``taskLocal``.
public var value: Value {
  get async throws
}
```

Author: We thought that might lead someone to think they are getting the exact value that is bound to the task local, but that may not be the case.

Reviewer: Ok, fair!
